Post on the new voting pattern and dynamic chat model selection (#2648)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2026-05-18-introducing-voting-agent.adoc

---
layout: post

> title: 'Parallel voting and adaptive models selection: smarter agentic AI on a budget'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Parallel voting and adaptive model selection: smarter agentic AI on a budget'
```

date: 2026-05-18T00:00:00Z

> tags: ai llm agents

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: ai llm agents langchain4j
```

> synopsis: 'Parallel voting and adaptive models selection: smarter agentic AI on a budget'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
synopsis: 'Parallel voting and adaptive model selection: smarter agentic AI on a budget.'
```

It would be better to get a proper synopsis and not a repetition of the title, something like:

Learn how LangChain4j 1.15's voting pattern uses parallel multi-critic evaluation and runtime model switching to build smarter, cost-efficient agentic systems with Quarkus.

author: mariofusco
---
:imagesdir: /assets/images/posts/agentic

In a https://quarkus.io/blog/agentic-ai-patterns/[previous article] we discussed why no single agentic pattern can cover all use cases, and introduced a generic `Planner` abstraction that allows users to define their own orchestration strategies and combine them with the ones provided by LangChain4j out-of-the-box. For instance, there we demonstrated how a goal-oriented pattern could be extended with a reflection loop to iteratively refine a piece of generated content.

> Among other things, that example put in evidence that having an agent evaluating its own output and loop until it reaches a quality threshold is a powerful technique. But this fundamental pattern also comes with a limitation: relying on a single evaluator can make the system fragile or less reliable. To overcome this issue, what if, instead of one judge, we could assemble a panel?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Among other things, that example highlighted that having an agent evaluate its own output and loop until it reaches a quality threshold is a powerful technique. But this fundamental pattern also comes with a limitation: relying on a single evaluator can make the system fragile or less reliable. To overcome this issue, what if, instead of one judge, we could assemble a panel?
```

== The voting pattern

> The https://docs.langchain4j.dev/tutorials/agents/#voting-agentic-pattern[voting pattern], introduced in LangChain4j 1.15.0, addresses this by dispatching the same input to multiple evaluator agents  in parallel, collecting their individual assessments, and then aggregating them into a single consolidated result. This is not a simple majority vote on a boolean decision: the aggregation strategy is fully customizable, allowing the system to combine structured results in whatever  way makes sense for the task at hand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The https://docs.langchain4j.dev/tutorials/agents/#voting-agentic-pattern[voting pattern], introduced in LangChain4j 1.15.0, addresses this by dispatching the same input to multiple evaluator agents in parallel, collecting their individual assessments, and then aggregating them into a single consolidated result. This is not a simple majority vote on a boolean decision: the aggregation strategy is fully customizable, allowing the system to combine structured results in whatever way makes sense for the task at hand.
```

> To put this into practice, let's build a story evaluation system. The pipeline works as follows: a creative writer generates a short story from a given topic, then a panel of three critics, each  specialized in a different aspect, evaluates the story in parallel. Their scores and suggestions are aggregated into a single critique, which is fed back to an editor agent that rewrites the story. This review loop repeats until the aggregated score crosses a quality threshold or a maximum number of iterations is reached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To put this into practice, let's build a story evaluation system. The pipeline works as follows: a creative writer generates a short story on a given topic, and then a panel of three critics, each specialized in a different aspect, evaluates the story in parallel. Their scores and suggestions are aggregated into a single critique, which is fed back to an editor agent that rewrites the story. This review loop repeats until the aggregated score crosses a quality threshold or a maximum number of iterations is reached.
```

            Generate a short story of no more than 3 sentences around the given topic.
            Return only the story and nothing else.
            The topic is: {{topic}}
            """)
    @Agent(value = "Generate a short story based on the given topic",
           outputKey = "story")
    String generateStory(@V("topic") String topic);
}
----

The three critics evaluate different aspects of the story: style, originality, and engagement. They all follow the same structure, differing only in their prompt:

[source,java]
----
public interface StyleCritic {

    @UserMessage("""
            You are a literary style critic.
            Evaluate the writing style of the following story.
            Consider prose quality, word choice, and narrative flow.
            Return a JSON object with two fields:
            - "score": a numeric value from 0.0 to 10.0
            - "suggestions": one or two very short suggestions to improve style
            The story is: "{{story}}"
            """)
    @Agent(value = "Evaluate the writing style of a story",
           outputKey = "styleCritique")
    CritiqueResult critique(@V("story") String story);
}
----

> The `OriginalityCritic` and `EngagementCritic` are analogous, each focusing on their respective  dimension and producing their own `CritiqueResult` with `outputKey` values of `"originalityCritique"` and `"engagementCritique"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `OriginalityCritic` and `EngagementCritic` are analogous, each focusing on their respective dimension and producing their own `CritiqueResult` with `outputKey` values of `"originalityCritique"` and `"engagementCritique"`.
```

The `VotingStrategy` is a functional interface that takes the collection of all critic outputs and reduces them to a single result:

[source,java]
----
@FunctionalInterface
public interface VotingStrategy {
    Object aggregate(Collection<Object> votes);
}
----

For our story evaluation use case, the aggregation strategy averages the scores and concatenates the suggestions from all critics:

[source,java]
----
VotingStrategy critiquesAggregator = votes -> {
    Collection<CritiqueResult> critiques = votes.stream()
            .map(v -> (CritiqueResult) v)
            .toList();

    double averageScore = critiques.stream()
            .mapToDouble(CritiqueResult::score)
            .average()
            .orElse(0.0);

    String allSuggestions = critiques.stream()
            .map(CritiqueResult::suggestions)
            .collect(Collectors.joining("; "));

    return new CritiqueResult(averageScore, allSuggestions);
};
----

=== Composing the agentic system

> The LangChain4j API allows to easily wire these agents in a coherent agentic system. First of all we can define the 3 critic agents and configure them as subagents of the voting agentic pattern, using the `critiquesAggregator` defined above to combine their results:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The LangChain4j API makes it easy to wire these agents into a coherent agentic system. First of all, we can define the 3 critic agents and configure them as subagents of the voting agentic pattern, using the `critiquesAggregator` defined above to combine their results:
```

        .chatModel(baseModel())
        .outputKey("originalityCritique")
        .build();

EngagementCritic engagementCritic = AgenticServices.agentBuilder(EngagementCritic.class)
        .chatModel(baseModel())
        .outputKey("engagementCritique")
        .build();

Object votingCritics = AgenticServices.plannerBuilder()
        .subAgents(styleCritic, originalityCritic, engagementCritic)
        .outputKey("critique")
        .planner(() -> new VotingPlanner(critiquesAggregator))
        .name("votingCritics")
        .build();
----

Then we can put the resulting `votingCritics` planner together with the story editor into a review loop that iteratively refines the story until it reaches a certain quality threshold:

[source,java]
----
StoryEditor storyEditor = AgenticServices.agentBuilder(StoryEditor.class)
        .chatModel(baseModel())
        .outputKey("story")
        .build();

Object reviewLoop = AgenticServices.loopBuilder()
        .subAgents(votingCritics, storyEditor)
        .outputKey("story")
        .maxIterations(5)
        .exitCondition(scope -> {
            CritiqueResult critique = (CritiqueResult) scope.readState("critique");

>             System.out.println("critique score = " + critique.score());

Reviewer: Remove the trace.

Author: Done.

        .build();
----

Finally, we can chain the `CreativeWriter` agent, that generates the initial story, with the review loop in a sequence, and define an output method to assemble the final `ScoredStory` result:

[source,java]
----
CreativeWriter writer = AgenticServices.agentBuilder(CreativeWriter.class)
        .chatModel(baseModel())
        .outputKey("story")
        .build();

StoryEvaluator evaluator = AgenticServices.sequenceBuilder(StoryEvaluator.class)
        .subAgents(writer, reviewLoop)
        .output(scope -> {
            CritiqueResult critique = (CritiqueResult) scope.readState("critique");
            return new ScoredStory(
                    scope.readState("story", ""),
                    critique != null ? critique.score() : 0.0,
                    critique != null ? critique.suggestions() : "");
        })
        .build();
----

The resulting system composes three different agentic patterns, a sequence, a loop, and a custom voting planner, into a single pipeline that can be invoked with one line:

[source,java]
----
ScoredStory result = evaluator.evaluate("a lonely robot finding friendship");
----

=== Visualizing the system

> Making the that `StoryEvaluator` interface to extend the `MonitoredAgent` one allows us to visualize both the topology of the system and the execution history of a sample run. The LangChain4j monitoring dashboard automatically detects the nested structure of the agentic system, showing how the different patterns are composed together.

Reviewer: I  think something is missing at the beginning of the sentence.

Reviewer: Did you mean: "Making the StoryEvaluator interface extend the MonitoredAgent one" ?

Author: Yes, there was an unwanted additional "that".

The LangChain4j agentic framework supports this scenario through https://docs.langchain4j.dev/tutorials/agents/#dynamic-chat-model-selection[dynamic chat model selection]. The idea is simple: instead of binding an agent to a single fixed model at build time, it is possible to provide the agent with a function of the `AgenticScope` that dynamically selects the model to use for each invocation. This allows the agent to adapt its behavior based on the current state of the system.

=== Applying it to the story editor

In our story evaluation pipeline, the natural candidate for this optimization is the `StoryEditor`. During the first iterations, when the story is still rough and the critique score is low, a fast and inexpensive model like `gpt-4o-mini`, defined as `baseModel()` in the code, is more than adequate. But once the critics start giving higher scores, indicating that the story is close to its final form, the editor can switch to a more powerful model like `gpt-5.1`, identified as `enhancedModel()`, for the finishing touches.

> As anticipated this possible by providing a function to the `chatModel` method of the `StoryEditor` agent builder. This function reads the current critique from the `AgenticScope`, checks its score, and returns either the base model or the enhanced one accordingly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As anticipated, this is possible by providing a function to the `chatModel` method of the `StoryEditor` agent builder. This function reads the current critique from the `AgenticScope`, checks its score, and returns either the base model or the enhanced one accordingly:
```

[source,java]
----
StoryEditor storyEditor = AgenticServices.agentBuilder(StoryEditor.class)
        .chatModel(scope -> {
            CritiqueResult critique = (CritiqueResult) scope.readState("critique");
            return critique != null && critique.score() > 7.8 ? enhancedModel() : baseModel();
        })
        .outputKey("story")
        .build();
----

In this configuration, the editor starts with `baseModel()` for all iterations where the critique score is 7.8 or below. Once the critics' average score exceeds 7.8, indicating that the story has reached a level of quality where finer editorial judgment matters, the selector switches to `enhancedModel()` for the subsequent iterations.

> Looking back at the execution log, this transition is clearly visible. During the first two  iterations the story editor is invoked with `gpt-4o-mini`. In the third iteration, after the critics' average score crosses the 7.8 threshold, the editor transparently switches to `gpt-5.1` for the remaining refinements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looking back at the execution log, this transition is clearly visible. During the first two iterations, the story editor is invoked with `gpt-4o-mini`. In the third iteration, after the critics' average score crosses the 7.8 threshold, the editor transparently switches to `gpt-5.1` for the remaining refinements.
```
